Doc issue 78 (#94)
bluesky/event-model: docs/source/data-model.rst

********************************

> Data Model: Documents and Events

Reviewer: I think of Events as one of the kinds of Documents.

Author: I have had some confusion with the event/Event terminology. In my mind there are event-based execution model "events" and then there are "Event Documents". I try not to think of the documents as "events" but as "Events". I think you are right, this heading should go back to just "Data Model".

Reviewer 2: So, let's be clearer.  Instead of starting with the next paragraph, start with something more direct.

```
In data acquisition, an *event* is a set of readings coordinated at a specific time.  A primary design goal of bluesky is to enable better research by recording rich metadata alongside the event data for use in later analysis.  Bluesky encapsulates all information from each event in a *Document*.  Other types of Document describe the events associated with an experimental run.
```

********************************

> *begin remove*

Reviewer: I still like this original first paragraph, doesn't seem exactly redundant to what follows. Maybe combine it with the next paragraph?

Author: I spent some time trying to combine the original first paragraph and the text from documents.rst. My problem is that the original is talking about little-e "events" and it seems confusing to talk about big-e "Events" at the same time.

I will try again.

Author: Here is a new proposal: I added the original paragraph to the second new paragraph. I still think using the term "event-based" is confusing so I propose using "document-based" instead. I felt like the original text fits here since the following paragraph talks about subscribing to a stream of documents.

```
A primary design goal of bluesky is to enable better research by recording
rich metadata alongside measured data for use in later analysis. Documents are
how we do this. 

A *document* is our term for a Python dictionary with a schema created
by the RunEngine during plan execution.  All of the metadata and data generated
by executing the plan is organized into documents. Bluesky's document-based
data model supports complex, asynchronous data collection and enables
sophisticated live, prompt, streaming, and *post-facto* data analysis.

A :doc:"later section <callbacks>" describes how outside functions can
"subscribe" to a stream of these documents, visualizing, processing, or saving
them. This section provides an outline of documents themselves, aiming to give
a sense of the structure and familiarity with useful components.

```

Author: working on the third paragraph below....

Reviewer: Hmm, I agree this is tricky. This line once made sense

> created by the RunEngine during plan execution

but is now too limiting: we can "ingest" data files from non-bluesky beamlines or simulations to create documents now. I wouldn't want to give the wrong impression that the RunEngine is the only way to mint documents.

Bluesky's event-based data model supports complex, asynchronous data collection
and enables sophisticated live, prompt, streaming, and *post-facto* data
analysis.

*end remove*

A primary design goal of bluesky is to enable better research by recording
rich metadata alongside measured data for use in later analysis. Documents are
how we do this.

A *document* is our term for a Python dictionary with a schema --- that is,
organized in a

> `formally specified <https://github.com/NSLS-II/event-model>`_ way --- created

Reviewer: This link is a cross-reference from bluesky to event-model. Now that we are in event-model, I think we can just remove this link.

Author: removed

Reviewer 2: AND, leave the title of this section as "Data Model: Documents and Events" since it creates the necessary association with the data acquisition term *event* and the bluesky document type *event*.

by the RunEngine during plan execution.  All of the metadata and data generated
by executing the plan is organized into documents.

> A :doc:"later section <callbacks>" describes how outside functions can

Reviewer: This is one of the bluesky internal references of the kind I think we should just remove. Maybe this whole paragraph can go?

Author: I liked the mention of subscribing to a document stream. It convinces me that this is very useful information. I propose to link to the Bluesky documentation:
```
The `bluesky documentation <https://blueskyproject.io/bluesky/>`_ describes
how outside functions can "subscribe" to a stream of these documents,
visualizing, processing, or saving them. This section provides an outline of
documents themselves, aiming to give a sense of the structure and familiarity
with useful components.
```

Reviewer: That makes a lot of sense.

"subscribe" to a stream of these documents, visualizing, processing, or saving
them. This section provides an outline of documents themselves, aiming to give
a sense of the structure and familiarity with useful components.

Overview
========

The data model is composed of six types of Documents, which in Python are
represented as dictionaries but could be represented as nested mappings (e.g.
JSON) in any language. Each document class has a defined, but flexible, schema.

> *begin remove*

Reviewer: I'm surprised you marked this for removal. I figure it's good to have a very short summary of the meaning of each document somewhere. As someone coming to this fresh, do you think this is so succinct that it doesn't add much value, that we might as well go straight to the more detailed description?

I would be happy with any of the following:
- Drop bluesky's version of this overview and keep event-model's.
- Merge some of event-model's verbiage (e.g. "the who / why / what") into bluesky's.

It depends on how much detail we want to present this early.

Author: I liked the similar summary of each document from documents.rst because there was a lot of detail, but I see the value of a shorter summary for each document. I will drop the bluesky version.

Data Model
**********

A primary design goal of bluesky is to enable better research by recording
rich metadata alongside measured data for use in later analysis. Documents are
how we do this.

> A *document* is our term for a Python dictionary with a schema created

Reviewer: This language should be updated since the RunEngine is now not the only way to create documents. Something like:

> A *document* is our term for a Python dictionary with a schema. The bluesky RunEngine emits documents during plan execution.

We _might_ want to elaborate:

> There are tools for composing documents directly, which can be useful for ingesting data that was not acquired with bluesky into this data model.

But that might be too much detail for this section.

Author: I am inclined to leave out the elaboration.

Reviewer 2: I agree that is too much for this context.

Reviewer: Great. I lean that way as well, though I included it for consideration.

* Event Descriptor --- Metadata about a series of Events. Envision
  richly-detail column headings in a table, encompassing physical units,
  hardware configuration information, etc.
* Resource --- A pointer to an external file (or resource in general).
* Datum --- A pointer to a specific slice of data within a Resource.
* Run Stop Document ---  Everything that we can only know at the very end, such
  as the time it ended and the exit status (succeeded, aborted, failed due to
  error).

> Every document has a ``time`` (its creation time) and a separate ``uid`` to

Reviewer: This is not strictly true anymore, now that Resource and Datum are proper documents. They do not have a ``time``, and datum calls its unique id `datum_id`, an unfortunate historical choice that we are more or less stuck with. Maybe, to keep things simple, remove the mention of ``time`` here and just say, "Every document contains a unique identifier."

Reviewer 2: This is important language.  Tripped over this before, myself.

Author: check

> identify it. The Event documents also have a ``descriptor`` field linking them

Reviewer 2: When this was all new to me, the two terms "Event Descriptor" and "`descriptor`" as a document schema did not jump out as being the same thing.  *Run Start*/`start` and *Run Stop*/`stop` similar but somehow easier to grasp.  Gradually, this struck home.

Is this the time to make this crystal clear for the neophytes?  The new terminology (with familiar names) in bluesky is daunting to new users.

Author: It would be valuable to pick one term from each pair and stick with it throughout this documentation. My preferences are "Event Descriptor", "Start", and "Stop" for what it's worth. But I think a new PR should be opened for this change.

Reviewer 2: I agree.  A new PR *after* this is all merged.

to the Event Descriptor with their metadata. And the Event Descriptor and
Run Stop documents have a ``run_start`` field linking them to their Run
Start. Thus, all the documents in a run are linked back to the Run Start.

Event documents may contain the literal values or *pointers* to values that
are stored in some external file or networked resource, yet to be loaded. The
Resource and Datum document types manage references to externally-stored data.

Example Runs
============

.. image:: _static/document-generation-timeline.svg
   :width: 100%
   :align: center

Finally, Event and Datum can be represented in "paged" form, where multiple
rows are contained in one structure for efficient transport and vectorized
computation. The representations contain equivalent information: an EventPage
can always be losslessly transformed into an Event and vice versa.

> The scope of a "run" is left to the beamline or individual scientist. It is

Reviewer: We have users in sciences outside the synchrotron world, and we go out of our way to avoid creating the impression that bluesky is for synchrotrons only.

```suggestion
The scope of a "run" is left to the research group or individual scientist. It is
```

Reviewer 2: > ... is left to the instrument team.

Reviewer 2: *instrument team* has been easier to use and includes anyone who has in interest in this subject - also not specific to "beam line", could be a lab

Reviewer: Perfect, those are the words I was looking for.

Author: check

Run Start Document
------------------

> Again, a 'run start' document marks the beginning of the run. It comprises

Reviewer 2: Here we go again: `'run start'`.  There is no such `run start` document in my stream.  How is that different from a `'start'` document?  Ah, yes, they are the same.

Reviewer 2: run 'start'

Author: new PR?

Reviewer 2: op cit

.. code-block:: python

   # 'run start' document
   {'time': 1550069716.5092213,  # UNIX epoch (seconds since 1 Jan 1970)
    'uid': '10bf6945-4afd-43ca-af36-6ad8f3540bcd'}  # globally unique ID

A typical example

.. code-block:: python

>    # 'run start' document

Reviewer 2: ---: # 'run start' document
+++: # run 'start' document

Author: new PR?

Event Descriptor
----------------

As stated above, an 'event descriptor' document provides a schema for the data
in the Event documents. It provides useful information about each key in the
data and about the configuration of the hardware. The layout of a descriptor
is detailed and takes some time to cover, so we defer it to a
:doc:`later section <event-descriptors>`.

Minimal nontrivial valid example:

.. code-block:: python

>    # 'event descriptor' document

Reviewer 2: ---: # 'event descriptor' document
+++: # event 'descriptor' document

Author: new PR?

    'time': 1550070004.9850419,
    'uid': 'ba1f9076-7925-4af8-916e-0e1eaa1b3c47'}

*end remove*

The command:

.. code-block:: python

    from bluesky.plans import scan
    from ophyd.sim import det, motor  # simulated detector, motor

    # Scan 'motor' from -3 to 3 in 10 steps, taking readings from 'det'.
    RE(scan([det], motor, -3, 3, 16), purpose='calibration',
       sample='kryptonite')

generates a typical 'run start' document like this:

> .. code-block:: python

Reviewer: This is older and less accurate that the version in event-model. We should keep the version in event-model. We could however reincorporate the example bluesky code if that seems helpful.

Author: check

Run Stop Document
-----------------

> A 'run stop' document marks the end of the run. It contains metadata that is not

Reviewer 2: ---: 'run stop'
+++: run 'stop'

Author: new PR?

Run Stop Document
-----------------

A 'stop' document marks the end of the run. It contains metadata that is not
known until the run completes.

The most commonly useful fields here are 'time' and 'exit_status'.

Minimal nontrivial valid example:

.. code-block:: python

>    # 'stop' document

Reviewer: Do you think we should add a comment like this to _all_ the examples? Most of them do not have one. I would rather apply it to none or all.

Author: I added them to all the examples.
